# ID-for-IPA
Toward an Instructional Design Document on the topic of the International Phonetic Alphabet

Week 1: Instructional Design Topic & Learning Gap (submitted Nov 5, 2023)

Topic: Using the International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA)

Learning Gap: At present, the only readilly available instructional materials for learning to use the International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA) are designed for the specialized use of linguistics students. Those materials, however, are overly technical and presume a regular, immersive, and career-spanning use of IPA. This results in a learning gap between linguists and everyone else. And this particular gap has a potentially practical implications for a variety of fields where there are less-frequent, less-intensive potential use cases. These potential learners include second language learners, singers of foreign language works, and actors working on dialects and foreign accents. All these potential users of the IPA are typically made aware of the clarifying power of the IPA, yet students do not have an efficient way to acquire IPA skills for themselves sufficient to make use the IPA on a relatively rare as-needed basis. For most potential users, it's a case of "Tell me, and I forget."

There are ethical, accessibility, and AI considerations to raise and address for this project. 

-Ethical:  

-Accessibility: Any phonetic representation of the sounds of a given language is only one of multiple possible representations. The further a given speaker's native way of speaking diverges from standardized pronunciations found "in the dictionary", the more that they will face additional hurdles making fluent usage of IPA for their own language, unless instructional examples include sufficient attention to the pronunciations with which they are most familiar. 

-AI: One of the attractions of taking on this project in late 2023 into early 2024 is how efficiently current AI can handle batch queries that previously would have taken geometrically longer to answer using the single-item queries of a pre-2022 search engine. For example, toward a possible a sample activity for learners, I asked Perplexity.io to generate a list of Shakespeare's ten most famous plays with each title transcribed in IPA -- which it did successfully! Multiply that success across many other examples, and it becomes readily possible to generate a large number of appealing activities for non-specialist learners , with far less tedious work assembling the examples and far less input needed from linguistics SMEs. 

That said, there are ethical, accessibility, and factual issues to using this tool. 

-ethical: Any reliable results generated by AI depend on using the careful, authoritative work of linguistics experts, whether in dictionaries, or more specialized works. In this case, the AI cited use of a specialized book still in copyright entitled All the Words on Stage: A Complete Pronunciation Dictionary for the Plays of William Shakespeare (2002)  https://www.amazon.com/All-Words-Stage-Pronunciation-Shakespeare/dp/1575252147

-accessibility: 

-factual: Preliminary testing already confirms that every piece of the results must be fact-checked. For instance, in reponse to a different query, the first result from Perplexity.io read as follows: 

Here are the ten largest countries in the world, along with their pronunciation in American English and in the local standard language:

       Russia - /ˈrʌʃə/ (American English) - /ˈrʌʃə/ (Russian: Россия) 

Note that the supposedly "Russian" pronunciation given for the largest country in the world is identical to the English pronunciation! Getting a correct piece of information required asking for the pronunciation of the Cyrillic spelling, in order to obtain a correct piece of information (which would need to be inserted manually into a larger list): 

        "Overall, the pronunciation of Россия in Russian is: /rɐˈsʲijə/ (ross-SEE-ya)."


NOTE: This is a student project repository for an 8-week EdX course during during Oct 17-Dec 4, 2023 for USMx: LDT200x, 
offered by the University of Maryland Global Campus as IDT200x Instructional Design and Technology: Instructional Design Models

        Week 1 (October 17, 2023): Introduction, History, Ethics, Accessibility, & Artificial Intelligence
        Week 2 (October 24, 2023): ADDIE Design Model
        Week 3 (October 31, 2023): Dick and Carey Design Model
        Week 4 (November 7, 2023): Understanding by Design (UbD) Model
        Week 5 (November 14, 2023): Rapid Instructional Design
        Week 6 (November 21, 2023): Successive Approximation Model (SAM)
        Week 7 (November 28, 2023): Learning Objectives, Bloom's Taxonomy, & Resources
        Week 8 (December 5, 2023): Sequencing, Assessment, & Alignment

Course Facilitators

Instructor: Andrew Pron, Ed.D. | LinkedIn

Dr. Andrew Pron is an Instructional Design Manager at Penn State University. He’s worked in the instructional design sector for 20 years, including both teaching and instructional design in the K-12 and higher education sectors. Andrew is currently leading a team of instructional designers focused on a portfolio of online graduate programs at Penn State University. He earned his Bachelor's in Technological Studies from The College of New Jersey, a Master's in Instructional Design from Thomas Jefferson University, and his EdD in Educational Leadership from Nova Southeastern University. He can be reached at Andrew.Pron@faculty.umgc.edu.    

Teaching Assistant: Darcy Goshorn |LinkedIn 

Darcy Goshorn is the Senior Manager/VP of Digital Learning Design and Development at Citibank. His mission is to help people see, feel and change. He’s worked in learning design and technology for 19 years, including both teaching and faculty development roles across domestic and international K-12, community college, and university institutions. More recently, Darcy has focused on instructional design in global corporate spaces that include hospitality, cybersecurity and now leads a team evolving global financial training using AI-powered adaptive learning. Darcy earned an M.S. in Classroom Technology from Wilkes University and a B.A. in English with Secondary Certification from Shippensburg University of Pennsylvania. He can be reached at Darcy.Goshorn@umgc.edu
